docs/validation_protocols.md, before:

# POS Application Validation Protocols

This document outlines validation protocols for key features of the POS (Personal Operating System) application. These protocols provide structured approaches to verify that features work correctly without relying on external testing frameworks.

## Purpose

- Document expected behaviors for features
- Provide consistent validation procedures
- Enable quality verification using first-principles approach
- Establish clear standards for feature acceptance

## First-Principles Validation Approach

The POS application uses a first-principles approach to validation that avoids external testing frameworks:

1. **Self-Validating Scripts** - Features are validated using scripts that verify their own results
2. **System State Introspection** - Database and application state are examined before and after operations
3. **UI Component Simulation** - UI components are validated by simulating their lifecycle and events
4. **Result Documentation** - Validation results are captured, displayed, and stored for future reference

## Global Testing Strategy

**IMPORTANT**: This first-principles validation approach is the standardized testing methodology for ALL phases of the project. It replaces all traditional testing approaches mentioned in earlier phases.

For all features across all implementation phases (including retroactively for Phases 1-2):
- Create validation protocols using the framework in `src/pos_tui/validation/`
- Avoid external testing frameworks (pytest, unittest, etc.)
- Use introspection and simulation to validate functionality
- Document protocols in this file
- Update checklist.md as validation protocols are implemented

When implementing features from any phase, validation protocols must be created using this approach. Existing features should gradually migrate to this approach as they are modified or enhanced.

## Running Validations

The validation framework provides a command-line interface:

```bash
# Run all validation protocols
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run

# List available protocols
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run --list

# Run specific protocols
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run item_editing edit_modal item_table
```

## Available Validation Protocols

### Item Management Validation

**Protocol Names**: `item_creation_via_form`, `item_editing`

**Description**: Validates item creation through the form interface along with editing, deletion, and optimistic UI update functionality

**Key Validations**:
- Form submission passes goal and item_type correctly
- Form data collected for all item types (TASK, LEARNING, RESEARCH, THOUGHT)
- ItemSaveWorker stores items in the database with correct goal and type
- Thought items receive IDs with the `th` prefix
- Basic item editing operations
- Item deletion with proper cleanup
- Optimistic UI update pattern with undo capability
- Proper state management during operations
- Dashboard refresh after saving a new item

**Usage**:
```bash
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run item_editing
```

### UI Component Validations

**Protocol Names**: `edit_modal`, `item_table`, `item_entry_form`

**Description**: Validates UI components without rendering them

**Key Validations**:
- Component instantiation and properties
- Lifecycle event handling
- Method signatures and behavior
- Message handling and event flow
- Form data collection for ItemEntryForm

**Usage**:
```bash
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run edit_modal item_table item_entry_form
```

## Feature Validation Protocols

### Optimistic UI Updates with Undo

**Feature Description**: The application updates the UI immediately upon edit or delete operations, without waiting for database operations to complete. Users can undo these actions via toast notifications.

#### Essential Behaviors to Validate

1. **Edit Operation**:
   - Item updates should be reflected immediately in the UI
   - Database operations should happen asynchronously
   - Toast notification should appear with "Undo" option
   - Database should eventually reflect the changes

2. **Delete Operation**:
   - Item should be removed from the UI immediately 
   - Database deletion should happen asynchronously
   - Toast notification should appear with "Undo" option
   - Database should eventually reflect the deletion

3. **Undo Functionality**:
   - Clicking "Undo" should revert UI changes
   - Clicking "Undo" should revert database changes
   - Confirmation notification should appear

4. **Error Handling**:
   - Database errors should be reported via notifications
   - UI should refresh to match database state on errors

#### Validation Strategy

The `ItemEditingValidation` protocol in `src/pos_tui/validation/item_management.py` validates this feature by:

1. Creating a temporary test database with sample items
2. Performing edit operations and verifying results
3. Performing delete operations and verifying results
4. Simulating the optimistic update pattern and undo operations
5. Verifying database state after each operation

### UI Component Structure and Behavior

**Feature Description**: UI components like EditItemModal and ItemTable provide essential functionality for the application interface.

#### Essential Behaviors to Validate

1. **EditItemModal Component**:
   - Should store and display the item being edited
   - Should provide form fields for all editable properties
   - Should handle form submission and pass data to parent
   - Should support cancellation of edits

2. **ItemTable Component**:
   - Should display item data in a tabular format
   - Should provide cell update mechanism for optimistic UI updates
   - Should emit appropriate messages for item selection/editing/deletion
   - Should handle context menu and action button events

#### Validation Strategy

The `EditItemModalValidation` and `ItemTableValidation` protocols in `src/pos_tui/validation/ui_components.py` validate these components by:

1. Using `UIComponentSimulator` to instantiate components
2. Simulating component lifecycle events
3. Verifying properties, methods, and message classes
4. Simulating user interaction events
5. Checking for appropriate responses to events

### Item Listing and Viewing

**Protocol Name**: `item_listing_and_viewing`

**Description**: Ensures goals are displayed in the dashboard table and that filtering by goal and THOUGHT type works.

**Key Validations**:
- Goal column present with correct values
- Type filter includes THOUGHT option
- Filtering by goal returns only matching items
- Filtering by THOUGHT type shows only thoughts

## Adding New Validation Protocols

To create a new validation protocol:

1. Create a new subclass of `ValidationProtocol` in the appropriate module
2. Implement the `_run_validation()` method with validation logic
3. Register the protocol in `src/pos_tui/validation/run.py`
4. Document the protocol in this file

Example:
```python
class MyFeatureValidation(ValidationProtocol):
    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__("my_feature")
    
    def _run_validation(self) -> None:
        # Implement validation logic
        # Use self.result.add_pass(), self.result.add_fail(), etc.
```

## Validation Result Documentation

Validation results are automatically saved to `data/validation_results/` in JSON format:

```
{
  "name": "item_editing",
  "timestamp": "2023-05-15T14:30:22.123456",
  "success": true,
  "passed": ["Item title updated successfully", ...],
  "failed": [],
  "warnings": ["Consider optimizing database lookup"],
  "notes": ["Created temporary database", ...]
}
```

These results can be reviewed to track validation history and identify areas for improvement.

Commit message:

feat: validate edit modal goal and type

docs/validation_protocols.md, after:

# POS Application Validation Protocols

This document outlines validation protocols for key features of the POS (Personal Operating System) application. These protocols provide structured approaches to verify that features work correctly without relying on external testing frameworks.

## Purpose

- Document expected behaviors for features
- Provide consistent validation procedures
- Enable quality verification using first-principles approach
- Establish clear standards for feature acceptance

## First-Principles Validation Approach

The POS application uses a first-principles approach to validation that avoids external testing frameworks:

1. **Self-Validating Scripts** - Features are validated using scripts that verify their own results
2. **System State Introspection** - Database and application state are examined before and after operations
3. **UI Component Simulation** - UI components are validated by simulating their lifecycle and events
4. **Result Documentation** - Validation results are captured, displayed, and stored for future reference

## Global Testing Strategy

**IMPORTANT**: This first-principles validation approach is the standardized testing methodology for ALL phases of the project. It replaces all traditional testing approaches mentioned in earlier phases.

For all features across all implementation phases (including retroactively for Phases 1-2):
- Create validation protocols using the framework in `src/pos_tui/validation/`
- Avoid external testing frameworks (pytest, unittest, etc.)
- Use introspection and simulation to validate functionality
- Document protocols in this file
- Update checklist.md as validation protocols are implemented

When implementing features from any phase, validation protocols must be created using this approach. Existing features should gradually migrate to this approach as they are modified or enhanced.

## Running Validations

The validation framework provides a command-line interface:

```bash
# Run all validation protocols
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run

# List available protocols
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run --list

# Run specific protocols
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run item_editing edit_modal item_table
```

## Available Validation Protocols

### Item Management Validation

**Protocol Names**: `item_creation_via_form`, `item_editing`

**Description**: Validates item creation through the form interface along with editing, deletion, and optimistic UI update functionality

**Key Validations**:
- Form submission passes goal and item_type correctly
- Form data collected for all item types (TASK, LEARNING, RESEARCH, THOUGHT)
- ItemSaveWorker stores items in the database with correct goal and type
- Thought items receive IDs with the `th` prefix
- Basic item editing operations
- Item deletion with proper cleanup
- Optimistic UI update pattern with undo capability
- Proper state management during operations
- Dashboard refresh after saving a new item

**Usage**:
```bash
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run item_editing
```

### UI Component Validations

**Protocol Names**: `edit_modal`, `item_table`, `item_entry_form`

**Description**: Validates UI components without rendering them

**Key Validations**:
- Component instantiation and properties
- Lifecycle event handling
- Method signatures and behavior
- Message handling and event flow
- Form data collection for ItemEntryForm
- EditItemModal passes updated goal and type values on submit

**Usage**:
```bash
python -m src.pos_tui.validation.run edit_modal item_table item_entry_form
```

## Feature Validation Protocols

### Optimistic UI Updates with Undo

**Feature Description**: The application updates the UI immediately upon edit or delete operations, without waiting for database operations to complete. Users can undo these actions via toast notifications.

#### Essential Behaviors to Validate

1. **Edit Operation**:
   - Item updates should be reflected immediately in the UI
   - Database operations should happen asynchronously
   - Toast notification should appear with "Undo" option
   - Database should eventually reflect the changes

2. **Delete Operation**:
   - Item should be removed from the UI immediately 
   - Database deletion should happen asynchronously
   - Toast notification should appear with "Undo" option
   - Database should eventually reflect the deletion

3. **Undo Functionality**:
   - Clicking "Undo" should revert UI changes
   - Clicking "Undo" should revert database changes
   - Confirmation notification should appear

4. **Error Handling**:
   - Database errors should be reported via notifications
   - UI should refresh to match database state on errors

#### Validation Strategy

The `ItemEditingValidation` protocol in `src/pos_tui/validation/item_management.py` validates this feature by:

1. Creating a temporary test database with sample items
2. Performing edit operations and verifying results
3. Performing delete operations and verifying results
4. Simulating the optimistic update pattern and undo operations
5. Verifying database state after each operation

### UI Component Structure and Behavior

**Feature Description**: UI components like EditItemModal and ItemTable provide essential functionality for the application interface.

#### Essential Behaviors to Validate

1. **EditItemModal Component**:
   - Should store and display the item being edited
   - Should provide form fields for all editable properties
   - Should handle form submission and pass data to parent
   - Should support cancellation of edits
   - Should allow editing of goal and item type

2. **ItemTable Component**:
   - Should display item data in a tabular format
   - Should provide cell update mechanism for optimistic UI updates
   - Should emit appropriate messages for item selection/editing/deletion
   - Should handle context menu and action button events

#### Validation Strategy

The `EditItemModalValidation` and `ItemTableValidation` protocols in `src/pos_tui/validation/ui_components.py` validate these components by:

1. Using `UIComponentSimulator` to instantiate components
2. Simulating component lifecycle events
3. Verifying properties, methods, and message classes
4. Simulating user interaction events
5. Checking for appropriate responses to events

### Item Listing and Viewing

**Protocol Name**: `item_listing_and_viewing`

**Description**: Ensures goals are displayed in the dashboard table and that filtering by goal and THOUGHT type works.

**Key Validations**:
- Goal column present with correct values
- Type filter includes THOUGHT option
- Filtering by goal returns only matching items
- Filtering by THOUGHT type shows only thoughts

## Adding New Validation Protocols

To create a new validation protocol:

1. Create a new subclass of `ValidationProtocol` in the appropriate module
2. Implement the `_run_validation()` method with validation logic
3. Register the protocol in `src/pos_tui/validation/run.py`
4. Document the protocol in this file

Example:
```python
class MyFeatureValidation(ValidationProtocol):
    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__("my_feature")
    
    def _run_validation(self) -> None:
        # Implement validation logic
        # Use self.result.add_pass(), self.result.add_fail(), etc.
```

## Validation Result Documentation

Validation results are automatically saved to `data/validation_results/` in JSON format:

```
{
  "name": "item_editing",
  "timestamp": "2023-05-15T14:30:22.123456",
  "success": true,
  "passed": ["Item title updated successfully", ...],
  "failed": [],
  "warnings": ["Consider optimizing database lookup"],
  "notes": ["Created temporary database", ...]
}
```

These results can be reviewed to track validation history and identify areas for improvement.
